PEP: 9999
Title: Creating the Packaging Steering Council
Author: Donald Stufft <donald@stufft.io>
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 21-Jan-2023
Replaces: 609


.. todo:: Explicitly declare that projects within the PyPA are "owned" by
          the PyPA, while the current maintainers are given large latitudes
          to run them as they see fit, a PyPA project is still a PyPA project.

.. todo:: Create a way for the maintainers of a project to request to the PkgSC
          that they want to remove the project from the PyPA and take sole ownership
          of it. This will be particularly important during some initial phase where
          we give existing projects a chance to leave if they don't want to be
          bound by the new process.

.. todo:: Flesh out the PyPA Team Member section more

.. todo:: Add a section on PyPA Projects, what it means to be one, etc.

.. todo:: Is 5 council members too many? The PySC has 5, but they are likely pulling
          from a larger candidate pool than we are. Maybe 3 is a better number? If we
          go to 3 how do we handle forceful ejections?

.. todo:: Currently individual terms on the council are multiple years, but staggered
          so that only 1-2 seats are up at any one time. The idea is that this allows
          fresh blood to come in, while still balancing a desire to have a consistent
          experience that doesn't change year to year. The PySC is up for vote entirely
          every ~year, which has worked well and is somewhat simpler to implement, should
          we just do that?

.. todo:: Figure out how to get this approved? Maybe a 3 person PEP-Delgate can do it
          again, or we can just ask the SC to voteon it explicitly?

.. todo:: Having 2 SCs is confusing, can we come up with a better name? Or maybe at least
          better acronyms besides PkgSC and PySC?

.. todo:: Should we only allow voting among the PyPA Team Members? Should we open it up to
          "contributors" who might not be pypa team members or otherwise provide a way for
          people who don't commit packaging code to have a say?

.. todo:: Declare that the PySC delegates all pacakging / PyPA related questions to PkgSC,
          including the long standing delegatations for pypi/interoptability PEPs. The PkgSC
          can choose to re-delegate those decisions to the same people.

.. todo:: Should we attempt to fold the packaging-wg into the PkgSC?

.. todo:: Explicitly call out that this means that the PEP process can also be used for
          single project decisions if needed (cf; PyPI)

.. todo:: Explicitly call out that the PyPA is still operating under a mandate to make our
          packaging tools work on well defined standards. Call out that we're not *required*
          to make every change or feature work on an interoptability standard.

.. todo:: Mention that one of the problems we currently have is that our only group decision
          making process is interoptability standards, so there is a habit to try and
          contort any decision into a standards based shape, even if it doesn't make sense
          to do so.

.. todo:: Call out that while the PkgSC is expected to operate on consensus, when consensus
          can't be had, they get to ultimate make a decision.

.. todo:: Call out packaging.python.org as an example of where we're currently failing to
          create a good user experience.

.. todo:: Do we need to be explicit about how things would work that require Core Python
          buyin? See for example a hypothetical "ensurenewworkflowtool".


Abstract
========

This PEP proposes the creation of a "Packaging Steering Council", who
functions similiarly to that of the larger Python Steering Council, but
within the specific remit of Python's ecosystem. In doing so, it revamps
the governance model for the PyPA to provide for more explicit decision
making and shepherding of the packaging ecosystem as a whole.


Rationale
=========

Currently the PyPA is a loosely related collection of projects whose
purpose is to implement the packaging story for the wider Python ecosystem.

In :pep:`PEP 609`, the PyPA settled on using Python's PEP process for
interoptability standards [#pypipeps]_, but otherwise leaves decision making
for the overall direction of the ecosystem up to individual projects to
make on their own. This largely enshrined the de facto processs into the
de jure process, which has served us reasonably well both before and after
the acceptable of :pep:`PEP 609`.

However, while it works reasonably well for interoptability standards, it
leaves the PyPA with no real mechanism to set the overall direction of the
ecosystem or to make decisions about things that affect more than one project,
but which is not an interoptability standard, and this gap in our process
has been causing a number of issues for us [#statusquo]_, such as:

- Inability to communicate to the community in anything resembling an
  official capacity.
- Inability or difficulty to decide on a "default" workflow tool
- Inability or difficulty to reduce the inherent complexity in competing
  solutions for new users
- Inability to declare what workflows or use cases are in or out of scope
  for our tooling.
- Inability to focus contributions and efforts towards the places that
  they would best serve the larger community [#contributions]_.

All of these problems essentially come down to the fact that the packaging
ecosystem in Python is like a very large ship, but instead of a captain at
the helm, we have one team independently controlling the engines, another
team independently controlling the anchor, and another team independently
controlling the rudder, all with different ideas of the direction of the
ship. While such a ship will eventually get somewhere, it's unlikely that
it's going to get someplace that any of the individual teams or any of the
passangers aboard actually wanted [#platypus]_.


Specification
=============


The Packaging Steering Council
------------------------------

The steering council is a 5 person committee, whom act as the final say
for questions within the PyPA remit.

Mandate
~~~~~~~

Ultimately, the purpose of the steering council is to make decisions that
impact the PyPA, both its members and its projects, and the wider community
of users, both producers and consumers of packages, at large. It has broad
discretion to make and enforce decisions on member projects, with the
understanding that it will use those powers sparingly.

The council is directed thus to:

- Promote and maintain the quality of the PyPA tools and the overall experience
  of interacting with packaging in the Python ecosystem.
- Make contributing to the PyPA as accessible, inclusive, and sustainable as
  possible.
- Maintain the PyPA, handling new project inclusion and ensuring that existing
  projects are following the decisions of the PyPA.
- Seek consensus among the PyPA members, contributors, and the wider community
  before acting in a formal capacity.
- Act as a "court of appeal" for decisions where all other methods have
  failed, as a last resort before kicking things up to the overall Python
  steering council.


Powers
~~~~~~

The council has broad authority to make decisions about the PyPA and it's member
projects. For example they can:

- Accept or reject Packaging PEPs
- Manage PyPA projects, including admittance to or removal of a project to/from
  the PyPA, or ownership of the projects within the PyPA.
  projects.
- Make official announcements, or otherwise speak for the PyPA project as a whole.
- Enforce or update the Code of Conduct
- Work with the PSF or the overall Python Steering Council to manage any assets.
- Delegate parts of their authority to other subcomittees or processes.

However, they cannot modify this PEP, or affect the membership of contributors
within the PyPA, except via the mechanisms specified in this PEP.

Like the overall steering council, the packaging council should look for ways to
use these powers as little as reasonable, while still meeting the overall mandates
that the council has.

To use its powers, the council votes. Every council member must either vote or
explicitly abstain. Members with conflicts of interest on a particular vote
must abstain. Passing requires a strict majority of non-abstaining council
members. If a strict majority is unable to be reached or if three or more council
members abstain, then the issue is referred to the overall Python Steering
Council.


Electing the Council
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A council election consists of two phases, each lasting two weeks:

- Phase 1: Candidates advertise their interest in serving. Candidates must be
  nominated by a PyPA member. Self nominations are allowed.
- Phase 2: Each PyPA member can vote for zero or more of the candidates. Voting
  is perofrmed anonymously. Candidates are ranked by the total number of votes
  they receive. If a tie occurs, it may be resolved by mutual agreement among
  the candidates, or else the winner will be chosen at random.

The election process is managed by a returns officer nominated by the overall
Python steering council.


Term
~~~~

A term on the council lasts for three years, each member's term runs from when
their election results are finalized until their successor's term starts. There
are no term limits.

For the initial election, the 5 candidates will be ranked by order of total
number of votes. The two candidates receiving the highest number of votes will
serve a three year term, the next two candidates will serve a two year term,
and the final candidate will serve a one year term.


Vacancies
~~~~~~~~~

Council members may resign their position at any time.

Whenever there is a vacancy for a term that still has 1 year or more left, then
a new election will be held to select a candidate who will finish out that term.
If there is less than a year left on the term, the council may ask the overall
Python steering council to appoint a replacement to serve out the rest of the
term.

If there are multiple vacancies, then the vacancies with the longest amount of
time left are filled by candidates with the most votes.

If a council member drops out of touch and cannot be contacted for a month or
longer, then the council may ask the overall Python steering council to vote
to replace them.


Ejecting PyPA Team Members
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In exceptional circumstances, it may be necessary to remove someone from the
PyPA against their will (for example: egregious and ongoing Code of Conduct
violations). This can be accomplished by a steering council vote, but unlike
other steering council votes, this requires at least a two-third majority. With
5 members voting, this means that a 3:2 vote is insufficient; 4:1 in favor is
the minimum required for such a vote to succeed.

In addition, this is the one power of the packaging steering council that
cannot be delegated or referred to the overall Python steering council, and
this power cannot be used while a vote of confidence is in process.

If the ejected member is also on the packaging steering council, then they
are removed from the steering council as well.


Vote of no confidence
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In exceptional circumstances, the PyPA members may remove a sitting council
member, or the entire council, via a vote of no confidence.

A no confidence vote is triggered when a PyPA member calls for one publically
on an appropiate project communication channel, and another PyPA member seconds
the proposal.

A no confidence vote lasts for two weeks, and is run by a returns officer
nominated by the overall Python steering committee, with PyPA members voting
for or against. If at least two thirds of voters express a lack of confidence,
then the vote succeeds.


PyPA Team Members
-----------------

Role
~~~~

The PyPA team members are the group of trusted volunteers who manage PyPA
projects. They assume may roles required to achieve the PyPA goals, especially
those that require a high level of trust. They make the day to day decisions
that shape the future of the PyPA and the projects operating under that banner.

PyPA team members are expected to act as role models for the community and
custodians of the PyPA and member projects, on behalf of the community and
all those who rely on Python.

The will intervene, where necessary, in online discussions or at official
events on the rare occassion that a situation arises that requires
intervention.

They have authority over the PyPA infrastructure, including the websites,
GitHub organizationsand repositories, bug trackers, mailing lists, IRC
channels, discord servers, etc.




Footnotes
=========

    .. [#pypipeps] An interesting note is that :pep:`PEP 609` never actually
                   specifies that we'll use the PEP process for large PyPI
                   changes, even though we certainly do!

    .. [#statusquo] Pradyun has written down a number of issues that are
                    currently hampering the PyPA in his excellent blog post:
                    `Thoughts on the Python packaging ecosystem <https://pradyunsg.me/blog/2023/01/21/thoughts-on-python-packaging/>`__.

    .. [#contributions] Obviously this is all still F/OSS, which means that
                        nothing we do can *force* contributions to handle
                        certain areas. However, we're currently in a situation
                        where we have multiple competing projects, that compete
                        largely on minor or inconsequential differences. This
                        splits the contributor base up, and by being explicit
                        about what the PyPA sees as the "golden path", we can
                        influence where contributors are likely to spend their
                        time.

    .. [#platypus] We even jokingly wear this particular dysfunction as a point
                   of pride and selected the Playpus, an animal that looks like
                   it was designed by 3 different teams creating 3 different
                   animals, as our unofficial mascot.


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.
